
# Report of DRMs in HIV and QC of  sequencing run

This repository is a modification of Samantha Campbell's pipeline to suit the needs of collaborators at UVRI in Uganda.


## Purpose

This pipeline allows the automated analysis of HIV-1 pol samples provided in fasta format. 
The pipeline initially queries the HIV-DB Sierra GraphQL Webservice using the sierrapy Python package and returns 
HIV-1 subtype predictions for each sample with additional information related to drug resistance-associated mutations. 
Reference sequences are added to the aligned files using MAFFT and a phylogeny is generated by RAxML. 
The resulting phylogeny with bootstrap values is saved as a pdf.


## Installation/set-up

### Requirements:

* Python3.6
* SierraPy
* MAFFT
* RAxML

### Python dependencies (modules):
* docx
* SeqIO (BioPython)
* ete3
* pandas
* json

## Procedure

**preprocessing.sh**

This bash script takes a single multi-sample fasta file as input and runs the preprocessing pipeline in two steps: 1. subtype and drug resistance query;  2. Add aligned HIV-1 reference sequences and generate phylogeny.


**Example Usage**

preprocessing.sh [-h -f -t ] -- program to split fasta sequences by subtype and generate a phylogeny
where:
        -h      show this help text
        -f      input sequences in single multi-sample fasta format file
        -t      text-tab delimited (.tsv) file with the patient information

**Command:** 

./preprocessing.sh -f <input_samples.fa>


**Output:** 

reports_{date}/		-  directory containing all results files
{date}.{input}.fasta	-  input fasta samples aligned to reference sequences
{date}.{input}.txt		-  text file containing sample to subtype information
{date}.{input}.json	-  HIVDB query response in json format, this is parsed to generate the individual .docx reports
{date}_DRM-overview.txt  - overview of drug resistance associated mutations across all queried samples
RAxML_tree-rerooted.pdf	-   visualisation of phylogenetic tree of samples and reference sequences
RAxML/	-   directory containing additional output files from generating and re-rooting the phylogeny using RAxML 


### Individual Scripts

1. preprocessing.sh

2. bin/
   1. perform_query.py
   2. parse_json_write_docx.py
   3. parse_json_store_metadata.py
   4. visualise_phylogeny.py


1)	perform_query.py:  a Python module to query the HIVDB Sierra GraphQL Webservice using the SierraPy package  (https://github.com/hivdb/sierra-client/tree/master/python). Requires HIV Pol samples in fasta format and returns HIV subtype information.

2)	parse_json_write_docx.py: this script will generate a report for each sample in Microsoft word docx format detailing the subtype and information regarding drug-resistance associated mutations.

3)	parse_json_store_metadata.py: generates an overview of the drug resistance associated mutations present in all samples from the current run and writes this to a tab delimited text file.

4)	visualise_phylogeny.py: The phylogeny generated by RAxML is then visualised in pdf format. The tree will be rerooted by rooting it at the branch that best balances the subtree lengths.

